Jamia Hamdard University  
Department of Computer Science & Technology  
School of Engineering Sciences & Technology  
New Delhi -110062  
(2026)  
 
 
 
UPSCALE PRO  
MAJOR PROJECT / DISSERTATION REPORT  
Submitted by: Amir Shamim(2023 -301-021) 
 
In partial fulfilment for the award of the degree of  
BACHELOR OF COMPUTER APPLICATION  
Under the supervision of Dr. Sapna Jain Ma’am  
  
DECLARATION  
I, Amir Shamim, a student of BCA (Enrollment No: 2023 -301-021), hereby declare that the 
dissertation entitled “ Upscale Pro ” which is being submitted by me to the Department of 
Computer Science, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi in partial fulfilment of the requirement for 
the award of the degree of BCA is my original work and has not been submitted anywhere 
else for the award of any D egree, Diploma, Associateship, Fellowship or other similar title or 
recognition.  
 
New Delhi -110059  
April, 2026  
 
Amir Shamim  
(2023 -301-021) 
  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
It is a pleasure to acknowledge many people who knowingly and unknowingly helped me to 
complete my project. First, I thank God for all the blessings that carried me through all these 
years.  
I extend my utmost gratitude to  Dr Sapna Jain Ma’am , project supervisor, who has always 
supported , guided, appreciated, and encouraged me to explore more opportunities. She 
enlightened me at various stages during the development of this project and provided many 
insights and useful examples, which proved immensely helpful in its successful completion . 
I extend my sincere gratitude to my teachers and guides who made unforgettable 
contributions. I thank all the non -teaching staff of our institution who were always ready to 
help in whatever way they could.  
  Content  
  
Serial Number  Title Page Number  
1 Objective   
2 Problem Statement   
4 System Requirement 
Specification   
5 DF-Diagram   
6 Entity Relationship Diagram   
7 Snapshots of input and 
output screens   
8 Conclusion   
9 Limitation   
10 Future Scope   
11 Bibliography   List of Figures  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Upscale PRO  
  OBJECTIVE  
The main goal of this project is to build and launch a scalable web platform that uses 
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) —specifically, highly tuned versions of Real -
ESRGAN —to upscale images easily. I want to make advanced AI upscaling, which usually 
requires high -end local hardware, accessible to everyday users through a simple, browser -
based web interface.  
The specific objectives are:  
1. To design and build a full -stack SaaS (Software as a Service) ecosystem. This utilizes 
React.js for a responsive client frontend, Node.js for a robust backend API gateway, and a 
decoupled serverless architecture to handle intensive GPU processing without 
bottlenecking the main server.  
2. To cut down processing time to a reliable sub -10-second benchmark. This is achieved by 
offloading the heavy PyTorch inference tasks to Modal.com's serverless GPUs. 
Traditional cloud GPUs require expensive continuous uptime, but this architecture utilizes 
ephemeral containers optimized to minimize cold -start delays, making the application 
both fast and financially viable.  
3. To set up a secure, rate -limited system that can handle multiple concurrent users. The 
system must process simultaneous image uploads and queue them intelligently without 
crashing the primary Node.js server.  
4. To offer tiered processing models (such as Real -ESRGAN Pro for standard images and 
Real-ESRGAN Anime for digital illustrations) based on user subscription levels, 
managing all authentication and billing data securely using a PostgreSQL database.  
  Introduction  
 
Today, digital images dictate how we interact with the web —from online shopping catalogs 
and social media platforms to digital archiving and professional broadcasting. But getting 
high-quality, high -resolution pictures isn't always possible. Hardware const raints on older 
mobile devices, aggressive compression algorithms used by messaging apps, and limited 
bandwidth often leave users with low -quality, heavily pixelated files.  
This project introduces a new, serverless GPU -powered Image Upscaler built as a 
commercial SaaS. It is specifically designed to take low -resolution images and automatically 
rebuild them into sharp, high -resolution versions. By shifting the computational bu rden from 
the user's local machine to cloud -based neural networks, the platform democratizes access to 
professional -grade image enhancement without requiring the user to own expensive graphics 
cards.  
Evolution of Scaling Algorithms  
Before deep learning and neural networks became the industry standard, developers mainly 
relied on basic spatial domain algorithms to resize images. Traditional mathematical methods 
like nearest -neighbor, bilinear, and bicubic interpolation simply calculat e and guess the 
missing pixels based on the color values of the pixels immediately surrounding them. While 
these methods are computationally cheap and extremely fast, they fail to understand the 
actual content of the image. Consequently, they often make im ages look blocky or severely 
blurred, permanently ruining fine high -frequency details like skin textures, fabric threads, and 
sharp geometric edges.  
To fix this fundamental flaw, researchers introduced machine learning to the pipeline. Early 
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) like SRCNN learned how to map low -resolution 
images directly to high -resolution outputs by training on thousands of image pair s. However, 
the real breakthrough in perceptual quality came with Generative Adversarial Networks 
(GANs). Models like ESRGAN set up a competitive environment between two distinct 
networks: a Generator that tries to create realistic details, and a Discrimin ator that tries to 
spot the fake, AI -generated pixels. The Real -ESRGAN model used in this project takes this 
architecture a step further. It utilizes a complex "degradation model" that simulates real -world 
image problems —like motion blur, heavy JPEG compre ssion, and camera sensor noise —so it 
can effectively clean up and sharpen dirty, everyday photos rather than just pristine laboratory 
samples.  
 
  Problem Statement  
 
Low-resolution images inherently lack fine spatial details. When these images are displayed 
on modern 4K monitors or high -density smartphone screens (like Retina displays), the lack of 
pixel density becomes obvious, resulting in a pixelated and heavily blu rred viewing 
experience. Older mathematical resizing methods cannot synthesize this missing data; they 
just blur the existing pixels together, which often makes the picture look significantly worse.  
The core problem this project addresses is twofold. First, traditional algorithms cannot create 
perceptually realistic high -resolution images. Second, running the advanced AI models that 
can hallucinate these missing details requires massive computational power, specifically from 
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). Historically, if a developer tried to run these heavy 
PyTorch models on standard monolithic web servers (like a basic VPS), the ent ire system 
would freeze up during processing. This architectural flaw leads to extremely slow loading 
times, massive server hosting bills, and inevitable system timeouts the moment multiple 
people attempt to use the application simultaneously.  
  System Requirement Specification  
 
4.1 Hardware Requirements:  
• Client Side:  A standard consumer -grade PC or mobile device equipped with a modern 
web browser (Chrome, Firefox, Safari). No dedicated GPU is required on the user's 
end. 
• Server Side Layer:  Lightweight, cost -effective cloud servers (such as DigitalOcean 
Droplets) to host the Node.js API and manage incoming web traffic.  
• Inference Hardware:  On-demand, serverless NVIDIA T4 or A10G GPUs provided 
by Modal.com. These are used exclusively for rapid AI processing and shut down 
immediately when not in use.  
4.2 Software Technology Stack:  This project combines the speed and agility of a modern 
JavaScript web frontend with a strictly isolated Python/PyTorch backend environment for the 
heavy lifting.  
• Frontend Stack:  React.js (bundled with Vite for fast Hot Module Replacement and 
optimized build times), utilizing context routers for seamless state management. The 
UI features a Virtual DOM implementation to offer rapid, interactive side -by-side 
visual image comparisons  without page reloads.  
• Backend Server:  Node.js encapsulating an Express.js API gateway. This server acts 
as the traffic controller —it handles user authentication, securely sanitizes incoming 
file payloads to prevent malicious uploads, validates JWTs (JSON Web Tokens), and 
pushes jobs to the pr ocessing queue.  
• Data Persistence:  Neon Serverless PostgreSQL. This handles connection pooling 
natively, making it highly reliable for storing user account details, subscription tiers, 
and tracking API usage limits tied to Stripe billing.  
• Storage:  Cloudinary cloud storage arrays. This acts as a robust Content Delivery 
Network (CDN) to safely store and quickly serve the finalized high -resolution images 
back to the user.  
• AI Processing:  Modal serverless Python containers running the PyTorch machine 
learning library and the specific Real -ESRGAN model weights required for inference.  
4.3 Functional Requirements  
1. The system must natively accept standard, widely -used web image formats: .jpg, 
.jpeg, and .png.  
2. The user interface must proactively restrict input image dimensions to 2048px (for 2x 
upscaling) or 1024px (for 4x upscaling). This is a hard requirement to prevent the serverless GPUs from experiencing Out -Of-Memory (OOM) crashes when calculating 
massive tensor matrices.  
3. The API gateway must implement a robust asynchronous queue (such as Redis or in -
memory queuing). This strictly separates the lightweight web server from the heavy 
GPU tasks, ensuring the site remains responsive even when the AI is processing.  
4. The system needs to provide immediate visual feedback, displaying an interactive 
before -and-after slider of the image once the GPU returns the processed payload.  
4.4 Cost -Optimized Deployment Architecture  
A critical engineering constraint of this project was achieving enterprise -grade scalability 
with zero initial capital expenditure. The entire production environment was successfully 
bootstrapped for $0 by strategically utilizing educational technology gra nts. 
The primary Node.js API gateway is hosted using $200 in promotional cloud credits from 
DigitalOcean, acquired via the GitHub Student Developer Pack. The heavy PyTorch 
inference pipelines rely on Modal.com's base compute allowances, ensuring no out -of-pocke t 
costs for GPU time. This financial engineering ensures the SaaS can maintain a high -
performance Minimum Viable Product (MVP) state, handle initial user traction, and validate 
its market fit before transitioning to paid infrastructure tiers.  
  DFD Diagram  
 
Level 0 Data Flow Diagram  The Context Diagram (Level 0) illustrates the high -level 
interaction between the end -user and the entire SaaS platform ecosystem.  
graph LR  
    User[Client/User] -- Low Resolution Image & Config --> System(Image Upscaler SaaS)  
    System -- High Resolution Image URL --> User  
 
Level 1 Data Flow Diagram  The Level 1 DFD decomposes the main system into its core 
functional components, explicitly mapping out how image payloads, user credentials, and 
database queries are routed across the network.  
graph TD  
    User[User] -->|Image Upload| Frontend(React Frontend)  
    Frontend -->|POST /api/upscale| API(Node.js API Gateway)  
     
    API < -->|Validate Auth/Tier| DB[(Neon PostgreSQL)]  
     
    API -->|Queue Request & Base64/Buffer| GPU(Modal Serverless GPU)  
    GPU -->|PyTorch Inference| GPU  
    GPU -->|Upscaled Buffer| API  
     
    API -->|Upload Asset| Cloudinary[(Cloudinary Storage)]  
    Cloudinary -->|Asset URL| API  
     
    API -->|Save Log| DB  
    API -->|Return Final URL| Frontend  
    Frontend -->|Display Result| User  
 
  Level 2 Data Flow Diagram (Processing Subsystem)  The Level 2 DFD specifically targets 
the internal background pipeline. It highlights the complex asynchronous handshake managed 
between the Node.js API interface and the remote Python worker executing the AI model.  
graph TD  
    Input[Incoming API Request] --> Q[Redis/In -Memory Queue Middleware]  
    Q --> Limit[Dimension & Rate Limiter]  
    Limit --> |Pass| Provider[gpuProvider.upscale interface]  
    Provider --> |HTTP POST / Remote Call| Modal[Modal App Entry]  
    Modal --> T4[T4/A10G GPU Container]  
    T4 --> ESRGAN[Real -ESRGAN Pipeline]  
    ESRGAN --> Output[Binary Output Stream]  
    Output --> Provider  
 
  Entity Relationship Diagram  
 
The database architecture is built on strict relational normalization principles to ensure data 
integrity and fast query times on Neon PostgreSQL. The primary tables manage user 
credentials, their active subscription states, and detailed logs of their proc essed images.  
erDiagram  
    USERS {  
        uuid id PK  
        varchar email  
        varchar password_hash  
        timestamp created_at  
        enum tier "Free, Pro, Business"  
    } 
    SUBSCRIPTIONS {  
        uuid id PK  
        uuid user_id FK  
        varchar stripe_customer_id  
        varchar status  
        timestamp valid_until  
    } 
    IMAGELOGS {  
        uuid id PK  
        uuid user_id FK  
        varchar original_url  
        varchar upscaled_url  
        int processing_time_ms  
        varchar requested_model  
        timestamp processed_at  
    } 
    USERS || --o| SUBSCRIPTIONS : "has"      USERS || --o{ IMAGELOGS : "generates"  
 
Snapshots of Input and Output Screens  
To guarantee operational stability in a production environment, I heavily stress -tested the 
system under multi -tenant load scenarios (simulating multiple users uploading 
simultaneously). By decoupling the architecture and moving the heavy mathematical lift ing 
from standard CPUs to isolated serverless GPUs, the system achieved an approximate 96% 
reduction in payload processing time. Instead of failing or making users wait over two 
minutes, complex images now process flawlessly in just 3 to 7 seconds.  
Visual Output Results  I carefully evaluated the finalized upscaled images to determine how 
accurately the AI recovered lost textures and suppressed compression artifacts without 
hallucinating incorrect data.  
• Result 1: Real -ESRGAN Pro (Architectural Textures)  I uploaded a heavily 
compressed, low -resolution JPEG of a brick wall structure. Standard resizing 
algorithms simply blurred the granular brick texture into a muddy brown gradient. 
However, the Real -ESRGAN Pro variant successfully recognized the underlying  
geometric patterns. It eliminated the blocky JPEG compression artifacts and 
mathematically reconstructed realistic granular textures back onto the surface of the 
bricks, all without introducing any strange, neon color glitches.  
• Result 2: Real -ESRGAN Anime (Digital Illustration)  Normal resizing algorithms 
are notoriously bad at handling digital art; they usually destroy clean vector -style 
lines, leaving them ghosted, blurry, or jagged. When I processed a pixelated piece of 
vector artwork through the Real -ESRGAN Anime instance, it  corrected the line 
deviations perfectly. The model isolated the primary dark contour lines, thickened and 
sharpened them accurately, and smoothed out the intermediate color gradients, 
completely removing any pixelated color bleeding.  
  Snapshots of Input and Output Screens  
 
To guarantee operational stability under multi -tenant load scenarios, system limitations were 
stress -tested. The transition from localized CPU processing to GPU environments yielded an 
approximate 96% reduction in payload processing time (averaging 3.2s to  6.8s on serverless 
APIs compared to >120s on monolithic architecture).  
 
Visual Output Results  
Evaluation of upscaled images assessed human perceptual visual quality specifically 
concerning texture hallucination.  
 
Result 1: Real -ESRGAN Pro (Architectural Artifacts)  
When subjected to a severely compressed, artifact -laden JPEG containing dense geometric 
patterns (brickwork), initial interpolation smoothed the granular brick texture entirely.  
 
Input:  Low Resolution, heavily compressed.  
Output:  The Real -ESRGAN Pro variant successfully detected structural outlines, eliminating 
the JPG compression artifacts, and authentically regenerated granular details on the surface 
without introducing hallucinated color artifacts.  
 
Result 2: Real -ESRGAN Anime (Digital Illustration)  
Traditional interpolation destroys clean vector -styled geometries typical of digital art, leading 
to heavily ghosted line parameters.  
 
Input:  Pixelated, jagged contours of vector artwork.  
Output : Running the `Real -ESRGAN Anime` instance corrected line deviations entirely. The 
model aggressively isolated the primary contour lines, thickening and sharpening them 
accurately while smoothing the intermediate color gradients flawlessly, removing pixelate d 
color bleeds.  
 
*(Mock placeholders for document formatting —actual deployment screenshots of the React 
front -end side -by-side matrices would be affixed here.)*  
 *[Insert Image: React UI Payload Upload Screen]*  
*[Insert Image: Pre vs. Post upscale slider tool showcasing brick texture recovery]*  
*[Insert Image: Processing latency matrix log from API returned payload]*  
 
  Conclusion  
 
As display technologies advance and screens become increasingly sharper, older digital 
image data visually degrades, creating a massive commercial demand for intelligent, 
automated upscaling solutions. This project successfully conceptualized, engineered, and 
deployed a functioning Software as a Service (SaaS) architecture that rigorously prioritizes 
backend scalability alongside state -of-the-art visual fidelity.  
By enforcing a strict separation between the main web routing server and the computationally 
exhaustive AI inference tasks, the platform maintains high availability. Transitioning away 
from legacy math -based resizing to advanced neural networks running ent irely on serverless 
GPU clusters solved previous industry challenges regarding slow processing speeds and poor 
image generation. Furthermore, by utilizing educational grants and strategic cloud 
allocations, the entire infrastructure was deployed with zero initial capital expenditure. 
Ultimately, the finalized system consistently processes high -resolution reconstructions in 
under 10 seconds, proving that developers can reliably integrate standard web APIs with 
complex, serverless PyTorch ecosystems to build a highly responsive, commercial -ready AI 
application.  Limitation  
 
While the decoupled serverless architecture works exceptionally well for general use cases, 
there are a few hard technical limitations inherent to the current deployment ecosystem:  
1. GPU Memory Limits (VRAM Saturation):  Image processing via GANs requires 
loading massive multi -dimensional tensors into the GPU's memory. To stop the 
serverless NVIDIA T4 GPUs (which are limited to 16GB of VRAM) from crashing 
due to Out -Of-Memory (OOM) exceptions, the application must strictl y cap input 
dimensions. Users cannot upload massive, print -ready canvases; inputs are 
dynamically restricted to 2048px for 2x upscaling and 1024px for 4x.  
2. Cold Start Latency Overheads:  Serverless architecture remains cost -effective 
specifically by spinning down and turning off ephemeral GPU containers when traffic 
is idle. If a user uploads an image during a "cold" phase, the system must provision a 
new container, initialize the PyTorch  environment, and load the heavy model weights 
into VRAM. This process appends a variable latency overhead (typically 5 to 8 
seconds) before the actual image processing even begins.  
3. Format Support Specificity:  Currently, the system is engineered exclusively to 
process standard, rasterized 2D image matrices (JPEG and PNG). It does not contain 
the logic to handle vector upsampling, animated .gif sequencing, or temporal .mp4 
video frame processing.  
  Future Scope  
 
In future iterations, I plan to significantly expand the platform's architectural capacities to 
handle media formats beyond single -frame 2D image reconstructions:  
1. Video Temporal Upscaling:  I plan to upgrade the queueing service and storage 
architecture to support low -resolution .mp4 payloads. This will require parsing the 
video frame -by-frame for tensor manipulation, ensuring optical flow consistency to 
prevent flickering, and correctly mul tiplexing the original audio track back into the 
final high -resolution render.  
2. Dynamic Tensor Chunking Logic:  To circumvent the current 16GB VRAM 
hardware limitations on high -resolution photography, I will implement automated 
image chunking. This logic will mathematically slice a massive image into smaller, 
overlapping grids, process those segments concurrently a cross multiple different 
serverless GPU nodes, and seamlessly stitch them back together without visible 
seams.  
3. Dedicated Face Recovery Integration:  AI models like standard ESRGAN 
occasionally struggle to accurately reconstruct heavily degraded human faces, 
sometimes rendering unnatural eyes or teeth. I plan to append auxiliary facial 
reconstruction pipelines —specifically parameterized models like Cod eFormer or 
GFPGAN —to target and repair semantic facial geometries independently of the 
background environment.   Bibliography  
 
1 
C. Dong, C. C. Loy, K. He, and X. Tang, "Image Super -Resolution Using Deep 
Convolutional Networks," IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 
vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 295 -307, Feb. 2016.  
 
2 
W. Shi et al., "Real -Time Single Image and Video Super -Resolution Using an Efficient Sub -
Pixel Convolutional Neural Network," in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , Las Vegas, NV , USA, 2016, pp. 1874 -1883.  
 
3 
C. Ledig et al., "Photo -Realistic Single Image Super -Resolution Using a Generative 
Adversarial Network," in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and 
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , Honolulu, HI, USA, 2017, pp. 4681 -4690.  
 
4 
X. Wang et al., "ESRGAN: Enhanced Super -Resolution Generative Adversarial Networks," 
in European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) Workshops , Munich, Germany, 2018, 
pp. 63 -79.  
 
5 
X. Wang, L. Xie, C. Dong, and Y . Shan, "Real -ESRGAN: Training Real -World Blind Super -
Resolution with Pure Synthetic Data," in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International 
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops , Virtual, 2021, pp. 1905 -1914.  
 
6 
Node.js Foundation. (2025). Node.js Documentation .  
 
Online  
Available: https://nodejs.org/en/docs/.   
 
 